In some situations, we might not be interested on the full list.

Let's say, for example, that we only want Dave's direct reports and their direct reports.

So let's say two levels down.

Now a single lookup is depth zero, meaning that if we match for Dave and we are only interested on knowing the documents of its direct reports, we just need to set the depth of our lookup to zero.

But if we want to do two levels down, we would need to have a depth of one.

And therefore, we'll find a full data structures of Andrew, Elyse, and Ron.

Graph lookup allows us to do that.

Using the previous dataset, child reference, where we have a direct reports reference inside of each document.

If you want to go two levels down, till_2_level down reports, you just specify a maxDepth field, value equals 1, on our graphLookup.

After we run this, we have our matching documents.

And then the list of results of direct reports to Dave up to two levels down.

So we can see here that, for example, Andrew will be listed, as well as Ron and Elyse, and obviously, all of Dave's direct reports.

So basically, maxDepth will restrict how many times we want to recursively find documents that match or they are connected using the FromField and the connecToField.

But let's say that, apart from defining a maxDepth field of I only want to go two levels down, I also want to know how far away are those elements to the first element that I find in my lookup.

Basically, I want to know how many recursive lookups did I need to do to find the particular documents.

For that, I have depthField, which I can specify a field name which will tell me exactly that, how many recursive lookups were needed to get this particular point.

When I run this I can see that Eliot is on number zero, meaning that I only needed one single lookup to find it.

Then again, it's the first base lookup.

Same thing for Meagan, same thing for Richard, same thing for Carlos.

But for Andrew, I need to go one recursive or, in this case, two recursive lookups down.

Same thing for Ron and same thing for Elyse.

By specifying depth field level I can get the information of how many recursive lookups were needed to find that particular element on the descendants field here.