Hi I'm Kirby.

Welcome to M 2 0 1 MongoDB performance.

Highly performant database architectures are a key condition of mission critical software infrastructure.

Throughout this course we're going to discuss performance in the context of MongoDB.

This course is five chapters long, with each chapter there will be a new set of lesson videos.

After most of these videos there'll be a quiz to assess your learning of the material.

At the end of each chapter, there will also be a set of related lab exercises.

Let's go over a few logistics of this course.

Target audience.

This is an intermediate course suitable for people on both the development and operations teams.

It is expected that you have some basic understanding of databases.

How does grading work?

Well, there are quizzes, labs, and a final exam as deliverables on your part of the course.

Quizzes are ungraded and exist to make sure you're understanding the content.

Your grade in the class, however, will be based on how well you do on the labs and on the final exam.

Each of these being worth about 50% of your final grade.

Students who receive a 65% or greater will receive a passing grade and will receive a certificate of course completion.

Finally I'd highly encourage you to participate in our discussion forum.

We have knowledgeable teaching assistants who are there to help answer your questions.

And you also have your fellow classmates who can aid in answering your questions and are often very knowledgeable and helpful resources.

Based on our experience, we've seen that students who perform best in the course are often those who are very active in the discussion forum.

This course will be divided into five main chapters.

There's the Overview chapter, Indexes Index Operations, CRUD Optimization, and Distributed Systems.

Each of these topics will take a deep dive into one or more performance related aspects concerning MongoDB.

By the end of this course, you should be familiar with the different techniques used to increase the performance of your MongoDB servers.

And you should be capable of analyzing the different trade offs that are commonly encountered in different performance scenarios.

With all that being said, we're super excited to have you in this course and wish you the best of luck.