All right, so in this lesson, we're going to talk about a very important database in the sharded cluster, the config database.

First thing you need to know about the config DB is that you should generally never write any data to it.

It's maintained internally by MongoDB, and it's used internally.

So, generally, you will never need to actually write any data to it.

However, it's got some useful information in it, so we are going to read from it.

So, I'm just connected to mongos and I'm running a quick s.h.

status on it just to see the typology of the sharded cluster.

So this is going to give us a lot of output about some of the shards, about the active mongos's.

It's going to give us some information about the database in our sharded cluster.

But all of this data is actually stored in the config DB.

Here, and just switching over to the config database.

I'm going to take a look at the collections we have in there already.

So these are all the collections that we have access to in the config database.

The first one we're going to look at is the databases collection.

So here, I'm just printing the results from our databases querie.

So this is going to return each database in our cluster as one document.

It's going to give us the primary shard for each database, and the partition here is just telling us whether or not sharding has been enabled on this database.

In this case, the m103 database has sharding enabled.

Now, take a look at the collections.

So this is only going to give us information on collections that have been sharded.

But for those collections, it will tell us the shard key that we used.

In this case, the m103 products collection was sharded on sale price.

And it also tell us whether or not that key was unique.

This one's going to tell us about the shards in our cluster.

And here, you can see the hostname contains the replica set name because these shards are deployed as replica sets.

The chunks collection is possibly the most interesting collection in this whole database.

So each chunk for every collection in this database is returned to us as one document.

The inclusive minimum and the exclusive maximum define the chunk range of the shard key values.

That means that any document in the associated collection who's shard key value falls into this chunks range will end up in this chunk, and this chunk only.

So this collection is sharded on sale price.

And we see that this chunk has documents with values of sale price for a minKey key to about $15.

MinKey, here, means the lowest possible value of sale price or negative infinity, if you want to think about it that way.

This chunk has documents with sale prices of at least $14.99, but lower than $33.99.

For example, if I were to insert a document into this collection that had a sale price of $20, it would end up in this chunk.

The config database also some information on the mongos process currently connected to this cluster, because we can have any number of them.

As we can see right now, we only have one.

But it'll give us a lot of information on it, including the mongos version that's running on the mongos.

So, just to recap, in this lesson we've covered the collections that we have in the configure database, including but not limited to, shards, chunks, and the mongos.

But remember, never write to this database unless instructed to by MongoDB support or our official documentation.

It has some useful information, but it's generally meant for internal MongoDB usage only.