Now the last example I have would show you how you might want to create a rollup table with some kind of a summary from an existing collection that has detailed information.

And in this case, we're going to say that an existing collection has all of the registration for all of the events that we're doing, and I want to create a registration summary where I show the number of people who registered by day, where the day represents the date that the registration came in.

And in this case, I might create the registration summary collection first by analyzing all of the existing data, and then incrementally update by doing periodic rollups into the summary.

So here, rather than merging on _ID, we're going to merge on the event and date, that's the unique identifier for each record in the summary table.

And we're going to create a unique index on event date so that things will get matched up correctly.

And now for the very first run, we're going to say I would like to-- and by the way, I'm let's say doing analysis for MongoDB World 19 registrations.

I'm going to match where event_id is MDBW19.

I'm going to group by data string here.

We'll create a string of a particular normalized format.

So that's what I'm going to group on here, and I'm going to count up how many in total there are.

And then I'm going to project the new document where event is MDBW19.

Date is you this grouping showed me, and total is the count.

And then I'm going to output that or merge into regsummary, merging on event and date fields.

So this is what's coming out here, and it's going to get inserted into the collection.

If the collection already existed with data, it will overwrite for every day with the new total.

And there we have maybe a whole bunch of days in this collection.

Now another day or two goes by and I say, hey, I last ran this on the 22nd.

It's now the 24th, I'd like to run this for the 22nd.

I'd like to run this for the 23rd.

For a single day, I might run something like this.

I'll still match the event_id MDBW19, but I'm going to now limit things where the date is, basically, during May 22nd.

Right?

It's greater than midnight 22nd, but less than midnight of the 23rd.

I'm going to count up the total.

Now I'm going to create this record where this is the event.

This is the date.

Right?

That's the then I'm querying by so that's the date I'm having field on.

I'm now merging into regsummary on event and date, and the record is going to look like this.

And if that date was already there because maybe we got a partial result for the 22nd when we ran it before, now that it's after the 22nd, it's going to give me the entire total and overwrite whatever the previous total was.

So because I'm doing a total sum here, I don't want to merge it or add it to an existing value.

I just want to write that that's the total of registrations we got on that day.