In MongoDB 4.2, when a tree node replica set is in a state where two nodes are performing an initial sync, the replica set will no longer have a primary, and therefore won't accept writes.

That is, where we used to have primary Startup 2 and Startup 2, we now have secondary Startup 2 and Startup 2.

Startup 2 lets you continue to write your replica set.

When the replica set is in this state, you can now reconfigure the replica set to have a single voting node using automation.

So now when a replica set is in this state, you can perform a reconfiguration, if needed, so that the number of voting nodes is equal to 1, and the replica set will continue to accept writes.

It's important to note that your client may not acknowledge writes if you're using a custom write concern value.

That is to say, that if specifying a write concern where more than one node needs to acknowledge the write-- w:2, for instance-- a replica set with one voting member will not acknowledge any writes until that write concern can be satisfied.

W majority and W1 writes will be successful if the replica set has a single voting node.

For more information on write concerns, please refer to our documentation.

Another new feature in Ops Manager 4.2 Account Manager are service users.

Remember, Cloud Manager and Ops Manager organizations can contain multiple projects.

And projects can contain multiple clusters.

Previously, you could only generate API keys at a project level.

Also, there was no granularity with regard to access control with these API keys.

This meant that if a user was given an API key associated with a project, they had access to a full range of features, including closer administration.

Also, previously, personal API keys were not visible to the Ops Manager admins.

This meant that if a person left the company and you had revoked their LDAP access, they could still use their API key.

Given the principle of least privilege, we only want to grant authorization to a user as needed.

Sometimes we need to programmatically retrieve data, but have no need to make changes to the cluster or to the users, for instance.

So what are service users?

They are a way for you to assign API keys at organization level and grant permissions to the API key.

You can do this directly from the Cloud Manager or Ops Manager UI.

There are five different organization permissions we can grant to an API key, the first being Organization Owner.

The Organization Owner has root access to the organization, including the project owner role to all projects in the organization.

This service user also has access to administrator organization settings, users and teams, and access to delete the organization permissions granted to the roles below.

The organization Project Creator provides project creation access, as well as permissions being granted to the organization member role.

The Organization Billing Admin role provides access to administrator billing information for the organization, as well as all permissions granted to the organization member role.

The Organization Read Only role provides access to everything in the organization, including all projects in that organization.

And finally, the Organization Member role provides read only access to the organization, including settings, users, and billing.

Remember, API keys are only used for accessing this information programmatically.

You can still get all of this information and perform all of the tasks we've listed through Declare Manager and Ops Manager UI.

So let's recap.

Ops Manager 4.2 and Cloud Manager provide two new features.

Automation Now allows you to reconfigure a tree node replica set where two nodes are performing initial sync so that you have one voting member.

This ensures that your replica set can take writes while it's in this state.

We've also added service users, which are a way for you to assign roles to API keys at organization level to allow finer-grained access control for your applications.