Three of the four CRUD operations are right operations, create, update, and delete.

All three of these involve changing the data in a collection in one way or another.

You only have read access to our class Atlas cluster.

Fortunately, with the Atlas free tier option we have a means of creating a sandbox MongoDB cluster in minutes and at no cost.

The Atlas free tier is ideal for proof of concept projects and in the early stages of developing a software application.

It's also great for testing and for educational purposes.

Please follow along and create your own Atlas free tier cluster.

You'll be using this throughout the rest of this chapter.

I've also included instructions for creating your sandbox cluster in the lab that immediately follows this lesson.

OK, here we need to complete the registration form.

Once you've completed the registration form, go ahead and click continue.

Upon completing the form, you'll be asked to specify a group name.

Groups or how we manage access to Atlas clusters.

I'm simply going to specify shannon-m001 as my group name, and create the group.

Once you've created a group, go ahead and build a cluster.

You might get a notification from the intercom integration that we have here when you do this, feel free to ignore it.

Also, don't be scared by what you see when this first pops up with respect to pricing.

Free tier is truly free.

We simply need to select the M0 instance size, and you'll note that the price has changed to zero.

Then we'll need to enter a username and password.

Once you've entered your username and password, you can go ahead and deploy your cluster.

Now again, the cluster is free.

No credit card is required for any of this.

Please make sure you remember the user name and password that you entered.

You will need it later.

Now once you've deployed your cluster, you'll need to wait just a minute or two for the cluster to come up.

Once deployed, the cluster is ready for connections.

But before we connect, we need to change one security setting to make it easy for us to access the cluster from anywhere.

Click on the Security tab, and then on the IP Whitelist tab.

Click Add IP Address, and Allow Access From Anywhere.

It'll take just a moment to update our security settings in the cluster.

While that's happening, let me stress that making a cluster accessible from anywhere is not a best practice.

You should be as restrictive as possible with respect to IP Whitelisting when configuring an Atlas cluster.

However, for purposes of this class this is fine, and will save us wasted time debugging network issues.