Projections reduce network overhead and processing requirements by limiting the fields that are returned in results documents.

By default, MongoDB returns all fields in all matching documents for queries.

You can define a projection as the second argument to the find method.

If I want to limit my result documents so that they just contain a title, I can do that using the following syntax, or almost.

So using this syntax, I can create a projection where results from this query will return just the title and, actually, the title and the underscore ID.

And we'll talk about that in just a sec.

So again, use the filter as usual.

But in this case, because we'd like to just have the title, we're also adding a projection as the second argument that we passed to find.

Now, I get the title and the underscore ID.

I get the underscore ID field because underscore ID is returned by default for all projections, unless I explicitly exclude it from the projection.

The projection syntax allows me to explicitly include fields in documents returned.

I can also explicitly exclude fields.

I explicitly include fields using a one, and exclude using a zero.

If I don't want to see the underscore ID field, then, to my projection, I need to add underscore ID zero.

Let's run this.

And now we can see that we do, in fact, just have titles.

Now if we have the reverse situation, where we actually want to explicitly exclude a couple of fields, we can do that as follows.

So let's say that rather than include title, I'm going to exclude viewer rating, viewer votes, and run time.

And let's pretty that up.

Now my results contain all fields except for the ones I explicitly excluded here.

Note that there is no viewer rating, no viewer votes, and no run time in these documents.

And just for the sake of comparison, if I drop the projection, then we see the viewer rating, viewer votes, and run time coming back in for those documents that have a run time, such as this one.

So, if you need to limit the fields returned by your queries, projection is the tool to use.

You zeros to explicitly exclude fields that you don't need to see in your result set.

And use one to explicitly include fields and exclude all others.