Hi, my name is Sam, and I'm going to talk to you about an exciting new tool for MongoDB called MongoDB Compass.

Compass was developed with one goal in mind-- to give you a powerful user interface for understanding, exploring, and editing your MongoDB data, and providing you with insights into your current server and query performance.

Let's jump right in and take a look.

MongoDB Compass was originally designed and developed with the intention of being a full graphical shell replacement for MongoDB.

Once you've downloaded and opened MongoDB Compass, this is the first window you're going to see, the Connect screen.

There's a bunch of options that we can fill out in order to get connected to a MongoDB instance, and the first one is the host name and the port of where that instance is listening to.

So I'm actually going to use one of my recent connections and connect to this IP on this port.

I also have the ability to connect to MongoDBs that are running with authentication enabled, such as a username and password, Kerberos or LDAP, or whether they're enabled with SSL, or simply I must use an SSH tunnel to connect to them.

Right here I just have a test instance running on a test machine, and I don't have any authentication, SSL, or SSH tunneling enabled, so I can just go ahead and hit Connect.

Now once I've connected to my MongoDB instance, what you'll immediately see is a list presented to me of the database names within the MongoDB instance itself.

In this case you'll see I have three-- admin, local, and MongoDB.

You'll see I have some other information here, such as the storage size of the databases, a number of collections within those databases, and the number of indexes on those collections.

If I do want to add a new database, I can do so from this screen.

I simply just hit Create Database.

And what I'll need to do is fill in a new database name and a new collection name, and then I have the option of making it a capped collection or not.

And when I'm ready, I can go ahead and Create Database.

And you'll see that gets added to the list here.

If I do decide that I actually want to delete that database, I can do that through the Compass interface by clicking on the trash can icon and simply typing in the name of the database that I want to drop.