So your application is chugging along, and then some connectivity issues arise.

What do you see in your application that tells you that your problem is an issue with connectivity?

So most likely what you're going to see are timeouts and connection errors.

Some might be detected on the client side, others on the server side.

And it's also possible that you'll see long hangs that potentially don't result in timeouts depending on how your application is set up.

Your application should be smart about these issues.

It should be able to turn a long hang into an error that it catches, and it should log a message somewhere describing the type of issue.

Finally, it should also generate a notification for you, the DBA.

But let's be realistic.

We live in an imperfect world, developers work under constraints, and things aren't always set up to be the way we'd like them to be.

So we may need to do some digging to find out the root cause.

What might it be?

Well, it could be any of the following-- incorrect URIs, interference from firewalls, or just things out of your control.

Why might you have an incorrect URI?

Well, maybe some of your servers have valid URIs for one another, which don't resolve from the point of view of the application.

The servers can all see each other and everything works until your primary goes down, and your application loses contact with the entire replica set.

Alternatively, maybe your servers have non-static IP addresses, so restarts cause you to lose servers unless you intervene.

Besides issues with URIs, you might also have a problem with a firewall.

Usually, the most basic firewall issues are caught early, 'cause they often prevent your system from getting set up until they're fixed.

But sometimes you might have a situation where your IP whitelist only permits the application to see some of the database servers and not others.

Again, the issue arises when the wrong server goes down.

Or maybe it's something out of your control.

Maybe a DDoS is hammering your servers, or your ISP isn't doing its job and packets just aren't getting through.

We'll take a closer look at these issues and similar ones in this chapter.

Let's get started.