Hi, I'm Shannon.

And I'll be guiding you through the basics of MongoDB in this introductory course.

MongoDB eliminates a number of technical challenges that slow the pace of application development.

In this course, we'll go through the fundamentals so that you can get up and running with MongoDB.

First, we'll introduce you to MongoDB Compass.

Compass is a visual interface to MongoDB that we'll use for many lessons in this course.

It allows us to configure a database and explore the data it contains.

We'll use Compass to explore a few data-sets and talk about the important design features such as support for flexible schemas and the range of benefits that it provides to application developers.

Then we'll dive into the MongoDB query language to give you plenty of preparation as you begin to think about building your own MongoDB application.

Throughout the course, we'll make use of Atlas, which is MongoDB's database as a service offering.

We've created a database cluster in Atlas specifically for use in this course.

You'll be connecting to and using it for many lessons and labs.

As you begin moving through this course, please take advantage of the discussion forum.

Feel free to ask any questions you have about lessons or assignments.

Many students also ask questions about more general MongoDB questions, and that's OK too.

We have teaching assistants monitoring the discussion forum to help you.

In addition, other students frequently jump in with great advice and answers if you get stuck on a lab.

We're almost ready to begin.

But before we do, I wanted to make you aware of the MongoDB University app.

Many learners like to download lesson videos to watch on their commute or in other situations where internet bandwidth is unreliable.

The MongoDB University app available on both iOS and Android makes this easy.

Search the App Store or Google Play for MongoDB University and give the app a try.

Most of our learners use it for at least some portion of every course.

OK, that's all the information you need to get started.

If you have any questions or comments about the course, again, please feel free to post something in the discussion forum.

We're happy to have you on board.

Thanks for learning with us, and good luck.