Before we dive into the course, let's discuss some prerequisites and walk through connecting to the infrastructure that is going to support the class.

The course prerequisites are minimal.

All that is required is a modern 64-bit operating system and an internet connection and your participation.

One note-- you'll also need to be able to make a TCP connection on port 27017.

This is easy to test.

Visit portquiz.net:27017.

You should see a page that looks a lot like this.

And make sure that you see something like this here that says you've reached this page on port 27017.

If you don't see this page, please contact your network administrator about opening up this port.

Additionally, make sure you post in the forums so that we can help you until this issue is resolved.

As you've seen myself and other instructors use new aggregation operators throughout the course, you are highly encouraged to pause the video and follow along.

All collections will perform operations on will be available to you in the Class Atlas cluster.

So what's Atlas?

Atlas is MongoDB's cloud-hosting service.

We'll let MongoDB worry about optimizing storage, security, and backing up our data for this course.

Signing up for Atlas is easy and free.

Visit mongodb.com/cloud/atlas and click the Get Started Free button.

After clicking the button, go ahead and fill out your information and click Get Started Free again.

And for now, that's it.

We'll be revisiting Atlas later on in the course.

Next, let's ensure we have MongoDB installed.

Visit mongodb.com and click the Download button.

Navigate over to Enterprise and select the download that's appropriate for your operating system.

Enterprise is free to test and evaluate, so we'll be using it throughout the course.

While that's downloading, let's click Resources and Documentation.

Click on Tutorials and click MongoDB Enterprise.

Scroll down and find the tutorial for installing MongoDB Enterprise on your specific operating system.

Lastly, we need to test our connection to the class Atlas cluster.

Open a terminal and paste the information you find below this video.

Go ahead and type show dbs to see all of the available databases available on the cluster.

Typing show collections will show collections within the aggregations database.

And that's it for the course prerequisites in connecting to Atlas.