Let's walk through how to migrate from MONGODB-CR to SCRAM-SHA-1.

SCRAM-SHA-1 is highly recommended over MONGODB-CR.

And you should only ever encounter MONGODB-CR on a system something greater than 3.0 if that system used to be on an order system, less than 3.0, and that system was migrated to a 3.0 or greater system.

The users that were created on that older system will still be using MONGODB-CR until you actually migrate them over to SCRAM-SHA-1.

All your new users will still be using SCRAM-SHA-1 on your upgraded system.

Many legacy users will still be using MONGODB-CR.

So in this video, we're going to walk you through the process of how to migrate those old MONGODB-CR users over to using SCRAM-SHA-1, which is the much more recommended authentication mechanism.

It's important to point out that upgrading from MONGODB-CR to SCRAM-SHA-1 might require you to upgrade your drivers.

Just make sure that you understand what version of drivers you're currently using and what authentication mechanisms those currently support.

It's just a good thing to keep in the back of your mind when going through this process.

Let's go ahead and connect to our MONGOD instance and walk you through the process of how to migrate over your old MONGODB-CR users to SCRAM-SHA-1.

On this computer, I was recently running a version of MongoDB 2.6.

On the 2.6 server, I created a user called Kirby whose password is password.

I then upgraded the server to 3.2.

So we should now have a user in this 3.2 server's database that is currently using MONGODB-CR, which is not cool.

We would much rather it be using SCRAM-SHA-1.

Let's go ahead and switch to the admin database and authenticate.

I'm now authenticated.

Let's go ahead and verify that this user is still using MONGODB-CR.

In the system.users collection, we can run find and see that the Kirby user is still using MONGODB-CR.

In order to migrate over all these users-- in this case just one user-- over to using SCRAM-SHA-1, we just need to run the command db.adminCommand( {authSechemaUpgrade: 1}).

And in running so, it says done.

OK.

And if we look at our users, we can see that Kirby is no longer using MONGODB-CR, but is rather using SCRAM-SHA-1.

And that's how you migrate users from using MONGODB-CR to SCRAM-SHA-1.

As a result of this, MONGODB-CR is now completely disabled on this database.

It is impossible to create users that use MONGODB-CR on this database.