In this lesson, we're going to discuss a new feature in Atlas called the Sample Data Set.

Atlas now exposes some sample data that you can load directly into Atlas for users who want to explore data immediately after creating their cluster.

Some users create Atlas clusters for production use, and they know exactly what data they want to work with.

Those users might already have their data in a bsondump or a JSON file.

So they can use the command-line tools mongorestore and mongoimport to load that data into Atlas.

And until this release, those command-line tools were the only means of getting data into Atlas.

But this requires users to leave the Atlas site, open a terminal window or command prompt, and then use a command-line tool, which can be time consuming.

Another caveat of using the command-line tools is that you already have some sample data that you want to import.

Finding good sample data, the kind that facilitates exploration, can be difficult.

And we want to make sure users can explore data right off the bat.

So we've released a new feature that allows users to load a sample data set into Atlas directly from the Atlas UI.

This sample data set was curated internally, and it's intended to give users a decently large-sized data set to play around with.

So we can load the sample data set as soon as we've created a cluster.

If we navigate to the Collections tab, Atlas will notice that there's no data in here, and it'll give us two options.

The first is to load the sample data set into our cluster, and the other option will allow us to manually create data using the Atlas Data Explorer.

Choosing to load the sample data set shows us this modal, which has a link to the docs page explaining the different collections in the sample data set.

And this docs page is very detailed with respect to sample documents from the collection, the indexes in each collection.

If we look in the Airbnb listings, we can see the indexes that have already been created on this data set as well as a sample document from the collection.

So we can actually learn a bit about this data before we even import it.

But we're just doing some exploration on free tier so we can load this without actually worrying.

So here, I'm just going to click the option to load the sample data set.

It should take a minute.

So after loading the data set, we can immediately explore the data using the Atlas Data Explorer, which is very similar to the interface provided by Compass.

One of the reasons this is so powerful is because it allows us to start exploring data in MongoDB without ever leaving the Atlas site.

And if we get the motivation to write some application backed by this Atlas cluster, we'll already know a bit about this data.

This data set contains a diverse set of data spanning a few different industries, including movies in the mflix data set, weather in the weatherdata data set, and housing data in the Airbnb data set.

The collections contain a few different document shapes with varying degrees of complexity and just about every data type that we allow in MongoDB.

This data set is intended to be a playground for newcomers or really anyone interested in exploring data on MongoDB.

We hope that it will cultivate the kind of exploration that excites users about MongoDB without ever leaving their web browser.

So just to recap, this new sample data set can be loaded directly from the Atlas website, mitigating the need for a command-line tool.

The data set is intended to facilitate data explorations, so it contains a few different collections that vary in industry, data types, as well as document shapes.