Welcome back.

We've made some improvements to cloud providers snapshots in Atlas.

Atlas now supports Cloud Provider Snapshots from Microsoft Azure, Amazon Web Services, and Google Cloud Platform-backed clusters.

Previously, there were some restrictions in the functionality we had available for Google Cloud Platform.

We've added incremental backup functionality using snapshots in GCP-- that is to say that we only store a copy which contains the documents which have been altered since the last full backup.

It's important to note that we're utilizing the cloud provider's native capabilities of taking a snapshot.

These snapshots are effectively a disk image, and taking these snapshots is handled by the cloud provider.

The incremental approach means that you incur less cost due to there being less data stored per snapshot.

As the incremental approach only requires us to store the delta between these snapshots as opposed to storing a full copy of the snapshot, incremental backups allow you to store multiple snapshots without the disk space requirements of a non-incremental approach.

This means Atlas now supports incremental backups on GCP and AWS using Cloud Provider Snapshots.

At present, Azure doesn't offer this incremental backup capability.

You can now also use GCP for multi-region backups.

So how does this work?

Atlas selects the primary member of the cluster at the time you enable snapshots for said cluster.

Atlas stores the snapshot in the same region as the primary member, and Atlas retains the snapshots based on your retention policy.

So Atlas continues to use that member and its corresponding region for snapshots and snapshot storage, even if that member is no longer primary.

We automatically create a new snapshot storage volume if the existing snapshot storage volume runs out of disk space.

We then create a new volume in the same region as the cluster's current primary.

Atlas then takes a full-copy snapshot to maintain backup availability and continues using that member and its corresponding region for further incremental snapshots.

Let's jump into the UI and configure snapshot storage for a Google Cloud-hosted cluster.

Each backup policy consists of a snapshot time and one or more policy items.

The backup policy time specifies the time of day in UTC that Atlas takes a snapshot for the backup policy.

Snapshots taken for the Hourly policy item may occur multiple times each day depending on the frequency interval specified.

Each backup policy item specifies a frequency unit and an interval and a retention time.

For example, the default backup policy specifies a snapshot time of 1800 UTC, an Hourly snapshot with an interval of one hour and a retention of two days, daily snapshots with a retention of seven days, weekly snapshots with an interval of Saturday and a retention of four days, and monthly snapshots with an interval of the last day of the month and a retention of 12 months.

So another improvement to our cloud provider snapshot feature is the ability to encrypt your Cloud Provider Snapshots using your own KMIP server.

This effectively means that you can bring your own key to encrypt and decrypt your backups through the configured KMS service for the Atlas project.

As we recently added this feature to Google Cloud Platform, this is now supported across all three cloud providers.

So let's recap.

Atlas now supports incremental backups on Google Cloud Platform and AWS.

You can now perform cross-region backups on all three cloud providers, and you can also integrate your own KMIP server and use your own key to encrypt and decrypt your Cloud Provider Snapshots.