Talking about getting our hands dirty, let's do that right now by looking at those different methods of creating an index.

First, I'm going to prepare my system.

Let's prepare this setup.

We're going to want a three-member replica set that starts on port 30,000 of localhost.

And we'll prepare a collection with some data that we can build indexes on.

We'll also build one index just to make it feel like a regular production system.

Great.

And let's see what our data looks like.

In this example, we'll want to add an index on the Social Security number to our collection.

First, let's look at the existing indexes.

Great.

We can see that there's no index on Social Security numbers.

So let's create it.

The index has been created.

And the command reports the number of indexes before and after the index creation process.

This looks good.

The index, by the way, is also building on the secondaries.

I can connect to one of those and confirm.

I'm going I want to give myself permission to read from a secondary.

I can connect to one of those and confirm.

I'll give myself permission to read from a secondary.

And here's my index on Social Security number.

Next, let's go back to the primary, drop the index, and create it in the background.

It looks pretty much the same as the previous operation.

So how can we tell that the index was built in the background?

One way to find out is to look into the log.

I'm going to let bash do the work for me.

And there's our log file.

Let's look at the index options.

And here, the index got built in the background with background true.

I can also see this if I look at the command components.

And here, once again, is our createIndex command with background true.

Interestingly, in the commands, I can also see my dropIndex command.

A difference between the background and foreground builds is that this command will yield the collection locks more often, letting other [?

rights ?] happen.

Again, for that reason, you would prefer building an index in the background instead of building it in the foreground on a production system.