OK, sometimes you'll be going along, your database is looking great, and then all of a sudden things get slow.

Queries are taking forever and you're not sure why.

In this lesson we'll look into some of the common reasons why this might have happened.

We're going to look into long running queries and some possible explanations, index builds, and write contention.

So the first thing you're going to want to look at is, to check to see if you're doing a lot of collection scans.

Maybe your application has just deployed a new query that doesn't use an index.

Or maybe that new DBA just dropped an index.

How do you check this hypothesis?

You have a few places to look.

So the server logs should show any long running queries.

Db.currentOp will show whatever is going on right now, including long running queries.

And, of course, you can always turn on the profiler.

But if the issue is performance, that may not be a great idea because it's going to slow down your system even further.

Now once you know it's a collection scan, you can simply build a new index.

But it's also possible that you've got a new query that uses an index, but it's not using it well.

For example, maybe your database is doing regex queries that are not anchored at the beginning of a string field, so it has to do a full index scan with every query.

This can actually be fixed, if you anchor it to the beginning of the string, so that it only has to search a subset of the index.

It's also possible that you're looking at inefficient index usage.

This is where you're using an index, but maybe not using it very well.

This can be harder to find because if logs capture these queries, they still show index usage.

In this case, you may need to go through and explain the queries, to see how efficiently you're returning them.

So that summarizes how to find and respond to long running queries.

Again, if you see a sudden performance drop, it's probably because your application is fielding a new query or because someone dropped an index.

If you want more details, you can find them in M-201, the MongoDB performance course.