In this video, we're going to talk about the authorization model that is used with MongoDB.

MongoDB actually follows a very straightforward and common authorization model, and that model is role based access control.

Role based access control, as the name implies, is a model where for any given user we're going to go ahead and assign a role to that user.

And that role is going to be assigned over a given name space.

And in the context of MongoDB, a namespace is just a database.

So for example, here we have a user named Kirby, and Kirby has the readWrite roll, which has been granted to him for the products database.

And this makes a lot of sense given the command that we've been using to create users.

As you can see here, this is really just a one to one relationship.

We have a user named Kirby, a roll called the readWrite role, and the readWrite role is for the products database.

Now that we have a general idea of what role based access control is, let's go ahead and break down what a role is.

The formal definition of a role with regards to role based access control is the following.

Roles are groups of privileges, actions over resources, that are granted to users over a given namespace, commonly referred to as a database.

So we know what users are and we obviously know what databases are, but what are privileges, actions, and resources?

Well, let's go ahead and take a closer look at these three things and how they relate together to define roles.

Let's first talk about actions.

All operations and commands that a user can perform in MongoDB are called actions.

And actions are performed on the resources.

Resources are any objects that hold state in our database.

So for example, a collection, a database, or a database cluster.

And when a user performs an action on a given resource that constitutes a privilege.

And if we then go ahead and group a bunch of these privileges together, we can go ahead and rename that group of privileges just a role.

This sentence should make a lot more sense now.

I'm going to go ahead and say it again.

Roles are groups or privileges, actions over resources, that are granted to users over a given database.

We've now looked at all of the different parts that make up this definition of a role.

And so you should have a much better understanding of what roles are in the context of MongoDB.