In this video I'd like to examine the different actions that are supported in MongoDB.

We already know that there are two parts to a privilege-- an action and a resource.

Actions describe the operations that a given user may perform on a resource in the database.

You can think of actions as verbs.

While resources are the subjects of these verbs.

Within MongoDB, we have several different types of actions.

Let's go through each of these categories one by one.

Let's start with query and write actions.

All of the actions in this category are related to CRUD.

You can see that we have things like find, insert, remove, update, and bypass document validation.

Pretty straightforward.

After query and write actions, we have database management actions.

Most of these actions are DDL operations.

These are structural to the database.

Things like creating an index, creating a collection, dropping a user, killing cursors, unlocking the database.

One thing I want to point out is that there's a difference between changing your own password and changing a password.

The changeOwnPassword role allows you to change your own password.

Whereas the changePassword role grants you the privilege to change anyone's password.

After database management actions, we can move on to deployment management actions.

Deployment Management Actions are also pretty straightforward.

They allow you to manage your deployment.

The one thing I like to point out here is that all of these operations-- all of these actions-- are only applied to the cluster resource.

After deployment management actions, we have replication actions.

As you'd expect, all these actions involve getting and setting different replications settings.

We also have the ability to append an oplog note, do a resync.

All these actions are also applied to the cluster resource.

After replication we can talk about sharding.

All of these sharding actions, well, pertain to sharding.

Things like adding a shard, enabling sharding, listing the shards, moving a chunk, and removing a shard, et cetera.

Next we can take a look at server administration actions.

All of these actions relate to administering the actual database-- things like running compact, getting the host info, getting a server parameter, shutting the database itself down.

All these are directly related to the server and administrating it.

Next we have diagnostic actions.

These are the actions often required to diagnose or monitor your database.

Generally, these are the actions that will have access to statistics and metrics collected by profiling or similar resources-- things like connection pool stats, db stats, index stats, server status, et cetera.

And finally, we can talk about internal actions.

These actions are the most sensitive set of actions that we can grant to a role.

Be very careful when granting these actions.

They should only be granted in exceptional circumstances, as they are internal to the database.

And those are all the different actions that are supported with MongoDB.