So let's assume that our intern has proven to be very capable.

And we now want to give him a bit more responsibility.

To do that, Alice, our security officer, will be able to create a new user-defined role, and then can change the intern's role to reflect this new set of privileges.

In this particular case, we want to allow our intern to perform updates on the meteorite collection within the NASA database.

Here we have the db.createRole command.

I'm creating a new role called internRole.

And here's the list of our privileged documents.

We just have one privileged document, which is the privileged document that allows us to update the collection meteorites on the NASA database.

So here's our resource document.

Here's our list of actions, in this case, just the update action.

And then we still want this intern role to be able to inherit the ability to read the NASA database, just like the intern was before.

So here is the read role on the NASA database.

And here are all the inherited roles.

Now when we click Enter, we can see that the role has been successfully created.

To complete this configuration, we just need to update the intern user and grant them the intern role.

Here we go.

I'm now going to update the user intern with a list of roles.

So this will override any roles they currently have.

And the only role that we're going to give them is the intern role on the admin database.

Here I'm going to go ahead and get the NASA database, because that's the database that the intern was created on.

And now I can go ahead and issue updateUser on the NASA database, specifying that I want to update the intern user, and replace all their current roles with this list of roles, which in this case is just our new role-- intern role.

Let's go ahead and authenticate as the intern, and see if we can update our meteorites.

Here we go.

I'm going to go ahead and authenticate as the intern on the NASA database.

And now I can go ahead and find a meteorite.

And here's a nice meteorite.

Now let's go ahead and try and update this meteorite.

Now I'm going to attempt to run update on the meteorites collection.

I'm going to get the same document right here by using ID equals 2.

And then I'm going to set a new field called newfield with the string, "the update worked!" Awesome.

And as you can see, here is our result.

And there's our updated document.

Great.

Now we can assign the task of correcting all the data to the intern.