In This video, we're going to talk about resources.

We already know that resources are the other half of privileges in MongoDB.

They're the subjects of our actions.

Resources will eventually have their state or behavior changed in some form by an action.

MongoDB has four resources, collections, databases, clusters, and the special any resource resource.

All of these resources will be defined by a resource document.

Let's look at how to define each of these with a resource document.

First, we'll check out collections and databases.

So here's the generic template that is used to define a collection or a database.

Through this document, we can actually describe a few different scenarios.

First, we can specify a specific database.

In this case, the products database.

It's important to note that we always have both the db and the collection keys.

If we want to specify a specific database, we must use an empty string as a value for the collection key.

This resource document would allow anyone to perform the associated action for this resource on any collection within the products database.

Conversely, if we want to grant someone the ability to perform an action on a specific collection across any database, then we use this syntax, here specifying the empty string for the db field and then specifying an actual collection name for a collection.

And of course, we can specify a specific collection for a specific database for any action to be performed on.

Finally, if we'd like to give someone access to perform their action on any non-system collection on all databases, then we can just pass an empty string to both the db field and the collection field.

As far as the cluster resource is concerned, there's really just one document and it looks just like this.

We just specify the cluster field to be true, simple as that.

And finally, we have the any resource document, which of course allows an action to be performed on any resource in the database.

This is what it looks like.

We just pass in any resource key, a true value, and this is the resource document for any resource.

Again, this resource is for internal usage only.

Avoid its use at all cost.

And those are the different resources in MongoDB.